dm: add skip-replace-sqls.md (#913)
pingcap/docs: tools/dm/skip-replace-sqls.md

- A single skip/replace operation targets at a single binlog event.
- `--sharding` is only used to preset the operation to the sharding group. You must preset it before executing the DDL statement and presetting it after executing the DDL is not allowed.
    - `--sharding` only supports presetting operations, and in this mode, you can only use `--sql-pattern` to match the binlog event.
    - For the principles of replicating sharding DDL statements using DM, see [Merge and replicate data from sharded tables](/tools/dm/shard-merge.md#principles)

#### Match the binlog event

When the replication task gets interrupted because of the SQL execution error, you can obtain the position of the corresponding binlog event by using `query-error`. When you execute `sql-skip` or `sql-replace`, you can specify the position to match the binlog event.

However, when you try to avoid breaking the replication by actively handling unsupported SQL statements, you cannot know in advance the position of the binlog event, so you need another approach to match the subsequent binlog events.

In DM, two modes of matching the binlog event are supported (you can only choose one mode from below):

> 1. binlog position: the position information of the binlog event 

Reviewer: Add a blank line before this line.

    - The binlog position is given by `--binlog-pos` in the command, and the format is `binlog-filename:binlog-pos`, for example, `mysql-bin|000001.000003:3270`.
    - The format of the binlog filename in DM is not completely consistent with that in the upstream MySQL.
    - When the replication error occurs, the position can be directly obtained from `failedBinlogPosition` returned by `query-error`.

> 2. DDL pattern: the regular expression (only for the DDL statement) matching mode

Reviewer: Add a blank line before this line.

    - The DDL pattern is given by `--sql-pattern` in the command, for example, to match ``` ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP COLUMN `c2` ```, the corresponding regular expression should be ``` ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db2`.`tbl2`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2` ```.
    - The regular expression must be prefixed with `~` and cannot contain any common space (you can replace the space with `\s` or `\s+` in the string).

In the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables, if you need DM to automatically select a DDL lock owner to execute the skip/replace operation, then you must use the DDL pattern matching mode because the binlog positions corresponding to the DDL statements on different DM-workers have no logical connection and are hard to confirm.

**Notes:**

- You can only register one operator (specified by `--binlog-pos`) for one binlog event. The previous one can be overwritten by the newly registered operator.
- Do not specify an operator for one binlog event by using `--binlog-pos` and `--sql-pattern` at the same time.

> - After the operator successfully matches with the binlog event (not after the execution succeeds), it will be deleted. If you need to match again (using `--sql-pattern`) later, you have to register a new operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The operator is deleted once it successfully matches the binlog event (not after the execution succeeds). If you need to match again (using `--sql-pattern`) later, you have to register a new operator.
```

> ### Support Scenarios

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Supported scenarios
```

> - During the replication, if the DDL statement unsupported by TiDB is executed in the upstream and replicated to the downstream, the replication task will get interrupted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scenario 1: During the replication, the DDL statement unsupported by TiDB is executed in the upstream and replicated to the downstream, and s a result, the replication task gets interrupted.
```

    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is skipped in the downstream TiDB, then you can use `sql-skip` to resume the replication.
    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is replaced with other DDL statements, then you can use `sql-replace` to resume the replication.

> - During the replication, if you know in advance that an unsupported SQL statement is going to be replicated, you can handle it beforehand to avoid breaking the replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scenario 2: During the replication, if you know in advance that an unsupported SQL statement is going to be replicated, you can handle it beforehand to avoid breaking the replication.
```

    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is skipped in the downstream TiDB, then you can use `sql-skip` to preset an operation to automatically skip this DDL statement when it needs to be executed.
    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is replaced with other DDL statements, then you can use `sql-replace` to preset an operation to automatically replace this DDL statement when it needs to be executed.

> ### Implementation Principles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Implementation principles
```

Reviewer: Use sentence-style capitalization for body headings.

6. The DDL statement that is to be executed by the DDL lock owner successfully matches with the received operator in step 4.
7. Execute the skip/replace operation corresponding to the operator and then the replication task continues. 

### Command

When you use `dmctl` to manually handle the SQL statements unsupported by TiDB, the commonly used commands include `query-status`, `query-error`, `sql-skip` and `sql-replace`.

#### query-status

`query-status` allows you to query the current status of items such as the subtask and the relay unit in each DM-worker. For details, see [query status](/tools/dm/query-status.md).  

#### query-error

`query-error` allows you to query the existing errors of the running subtask and relay unit in DM-workers.

##### Command usage

```bash
query-error [--worker=127.0.0.1:8262] [task-name]
```

##### Arguments description

+ `worker`:
    - Flag parameter, string, `--worker`, optional
    - If it is not specified, this command queries the errors in all DM-workers; if it is specified, this command queries the error of the specified DM-worker.

+ `task-name`:
    - Non-flag parameter, string, optional

>     - If it is not specified, this command queries the errors of all subtasks; if it is specified, this command queries the error of the specified subtask.

Reviewer 2: should it be `the specified task.`?

##### Example of results

```bash
» query-error test

> {

Reviewer: According to the new code comment style, we need to add a period in the end for each comment, both phrases and complete sentences.

```

Now, if you query the status of the task using `query-status`, you can see that `stage` has changed into `Paused` and there is some related error description information in `errors`.

To obtain the details about the error, you should use `query-error`. For example, you can execute `query-error test` to get the position of the failed binlog event (`failedBinlogPosition`), which is `mysql-bin|000001.000003:34642`. 

##### Passively skip the SQL statement

Assume that it is acceptable in the actual production environment that this DDL statement is not executed in the downstream TiDB (namely, the original table schema is retained). Then you can use `sql-skip` to skip this DDL statement to resume the replication. The procedures are as follows:

1. Use `query-error` to obtain the position of the failed binlog event.
    - You can get the position from `failedBinlogPosition` returned by `query-error`.
    - In this example, the position is `mysql-bin|000001.000003:34642`.
2. Use `sql-skip` to preset a skip operation that is to be executed when DM replicates this binlog event to the downstream after using `resume-task`.

>     ```bash

Reviewer: Add a blank line before the code block (to make it looks better and avoid possible display error). Please also add a blank for other similar positions in this PR.

    » sql-skip --worker=127.0.0.1:8262 --binlog-pos=mysql-bin|000001.000003:34642 test
    {
        "result": true,
        "msg": "",
        "workers": [
            {
                "result": true,
                "worker": "",
                "msg": ""
            }
        ]
    }
    ```
    You can also view the following log in the corresponding DM-worker node: 

>     ```bash

Reviewer: Add a blank line before this line.

In DM, two modes of matching the binlog event are supported (you can only choose one mode from below):
1. binlog position: the position information of the binlog event 
    - The binlog position is given by `--binlog-pos` in the command, and the format is `binlog-filename:binlog-pos`, for example, `mysql-bin|000001.000003:3270`.
    - The format of the binlog filename in DM is not completely consistent with that in the upstream MySQL.
    - When the replication error occurs, the position can be directly obtained from `failedBinlogPosition` returned by `query-error`.
2. DDL pattern: the regular expression (only for the DDL statement) matching mode
    - The DDL pattern is given by `--sql-pattern` in the command, for example, to match ``` ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP COLUMN `c2` ```, the corresponding regular expression should be ``` ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db2`.`tbl2`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2` ```.
    - The regular expression must be prefixed with `~` and cannot contain any common space (you can replace the space with `\s` or `\s+` in the string).

> In the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables, if you need DM to automatically select a DDL lock owner to execute the skip/replace operation, then you must use the DDL pattern matching mode because the binlog positions corresponding to the DDL statements on different DM-workers are not logically connected and are hard to confirm.

Reviewer 3: *are not logically connected*, is *relationship* better than *connected*?

Author: I think maybe you can say: because the binlog positions corresponding to the DDL statements on different DM-workers **have no logical connection** and are hard to confirm. (I think "have no logical connection" is better than "have no logical relationship", how about you?)

Reviewer 3: fine.

- During the replication, if the DDL statement unsupported by TiDB is executed in the upstream and replicated to the downstream, the replication task will get interrupted.
    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is skipped in the downstream TiDB, then you can use `sql-skip` to resume the replication.
    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is replaced with other DDL statements, then you can use `sql-replace` to resume the replication.
- During the replication, if you know in advance that an unsupported SQL statement is going to be replicated, you can handle it beforehand to avoid breaking the replication.
    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is skipped in the downstream TiDB, then you can use `sql-skip` to preset an operation to automatically skip this DDL statement when it needs to be executed.
    - If it is acceptable that this DDL statement is replaced with other DDL statements, then you can use `sql-replace` to preset an operation to automatically replace this DDL statement when it needs to be executed.

### Implementation Principles

In DM, simplified procedures of incremental data replication can be described as follows:

> 1. The relay processing unit is used as a slave of the upstream MySQL to fetch the binlog that is persisted in the local storage as the relay log. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The relay unit is used as a slave of the upstream MySQL to fetch the binlog that is persisted in the local storage as the relay log. 
```

2. The binlog replication unit (sync) reads the local relay log to obtain the binlog event. 
3. The binlog replication unit parses the binlog event and builds the DDL/DML statements, and then replicates these statements to the downstream TiDB.

When the binlog replication unit is parsing the binlog event and replicating data to the downstream, the replication process might get interrupted because the corresponding SQL statement is not supported by TiDB.

> In DM, you can register some skip/replace operators for the binlog event. Before replicating the SQL statements to the downstream, you can compare the current binlog event information(position, DDL statement) with registered operators. If the position or the DDL matches with a registered operator, you can execute the operation corresponding to the operator and then remove this operator. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In DM, you can register some skip/replace operators for the binlog event. Before replicating the SQL statements to the downstream, DM will compare the current binlog event information(position, DDL statement) with registered operators. If the position or the DDL matches with a registered operator, it will execute the operation corresponding to the operator and then remove this operator. 
```

1. Use `sql-skip` or `sql-replace` to register an operator (on DM-master) for the specified DDL pattern.
2. Each DM-worker parses the relay log to obtain the binlog event.
3. DM-master coordinates the DDL lock replication among DM-workers.
4. DM-master checks if the DDL lock replication succeeds, and sends the registered operator in step 1 to the DDL lock owner.
5. DM-master requests the DDL lock owner to execute the DDL statement.
6. The DDL statement that is to be executed by the DDL lock owner successfully matches with the received operator in step 4.
7. Execute the skip/replace operation corresponding to the operator and then the replication task continues. 

### Command

When you use `dmctl` to manually handle the SQL statements unsupported by TiDB, the commonly used commands include `query-status`, `query-error`, `sql-skip` and `sql-replace`.

#### query-status

`query-status` allows you to query the current status of items such as the subtask and the relay unit in each DM-worker. For details, see [query status](/tools/dm/query-status.md).  

> ---

Reviewer 3: do we use a horizontal line to split content in the website?

#### query-error

`query-error` allows you to query the existing errors of the running subtask and relay unit in DM-workers.

##### Command usage

```bash
query-error [--worker=127.0.0.1:8262] [task-name]
```

> ##### Variable description

Reviewer 3: how about *Arguments description*? ditto below.

    You can also view the following log in the corresponding DM-worker node:
    ```bash
    2018/12/28 15:33:13 operator.go:121: [info] [sql-operator] set a new operator 
    uuid: c699a18a-8e75-47eb-8e7e-0e5abde2053c, pattern: ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db2`.`tbl2`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2`, 
    op: REPLACE, args: ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP INDEX idx_c2; ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP COLUMN `c2`
    on replication unit
    ```
4. Execute the DDL statements in the upstream MySQL.
5. Check if the downstream table schema is altered successfully, and you can view the following log in the corresponding DM-worker node:
    ```bash
    2018/12/28 15:33:45 operator.go:158: [info] [sql-operator] 
    sql-pattern ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db2`.`tbl2`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2` matched SQL 
    USE `db2`; ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP COLUMN `c2`;, 
    applying operator uuid: c699a18a-8e75-47eb-8e7e-0e5abde2053c, 
    pattern: ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db2`.`tbl2`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2`, 
    op: REPLACE, args: ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP INDEX idx_c2; ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP COLUMN `c2`
    ```
6. Use `query-status` to guarantee that the `stage` of the task has been sustained as `Running`.

> 7. Use `query-error` to guarantee that the DDL execution error has been removed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. Use `query-error` to guarantee that no DDL execution error exists.
```

##### Business scenario

Assume that we need to merge and replicate multiple tables in multiple upstream MySQL instances to one same table in the downstream TiDB through multiple DM-workers. And the DDL statement unsupported by TiDB is executed to the upstream sharded tables. 

After DM-master coordinates the DDL replication through the DDL lock and requests the DDL lock owner to execute the DDL statement to the downstream, the replication will get interrupted because this DDL statement is not supported by TiDB. 

##### Passively skip the SQL statement

In the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables, passively skipping the unsupported DDL statement has the similar steps with [Passively skip after the replication gets interrupted](#passively-skip-after-the-replication-gets-interrupted).

There are two major differences between the two scenarios as follows. In the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables:  

1. We just need the DDL lock owner to execute `sql-skip` (`--worker={DDL-lock-owner}`). 
2. We just need the DDL lock owner to execute `resume-task` (`--worker={DDL-lock-owner}`).

---

> #### Actively replace after the replication gets interrupted in the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Actively replace before the replication gets interrupted in the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables
```

    sharding:true
    ```
5. Execute the DDL statements to the sharded tables in the upstream MySQL instances.
6. Check if the downstream table schema is altered successfully, and you can also view the following log in the DDL lock **owner** node:
    ```bash
    2018/12/28 16:54:35 operator.go:121: [info] [sql-operator] set a new operator 
    uuid: c959f2fb-f1c2-40c7-a1fa-e73cd51736dd, 
    pattern: ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`shard_db`.`shard_table`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2`, 
    op: REPLACE, args: ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP INDEX idx_c2; ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP COLUMN `c2`
    on replication unit
    ```
    ```bash
    2018/12/28 16:54:35 operator.go:158: [info] [sql-operator] 
    sql-pattern ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`shard_db`.`shard_table`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2` matched SQL 
    USE `shard_db`; ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP COLUMN `c2`;, 
    applying operator uuid: c959f2fb-f1c2-40c7-a1fa-e73cd51736dd, 
    pattern: ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`shard_db`.`shard_table`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2`, 
    op: REPLACE, args: ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP INDEX idx_c2; ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP COLUMN `c2`
    ```

>     At the same time, you can view the following log in the **DM-master** node:

Reviewer 3: Is *In additional* better than *At the same time* here?

    uuid: eba35acd-6c5e-4bc3-b0b0-ae8bd1232351, request: name:"test" op:REPLACE 
    args:"ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP INDEX idx_c2;" 
    args:"ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP COLUMN `c2`" 
    sqlPattern:"~(?i)ALTER\\s+TABLE\\s+`shard_db`.`shard_table`\\s+DROP\\s+COLUMN\\s+`c2`" 
    sharding:true  
    with key ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`shard_db`.`shard_table`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2` matched SQL 
    USE `shard_db`; ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP COLUMN `c2`;
    ```
    ```bash
    2018/12/28 16:54:36 operator.go:145: [info] [sql-operator] remove an operator 
    uuid: eba35acd-6c5e-4bc3-b0b0-ae8bd1232351, request: name:"test" op:REPLACE 
    args:"ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP INDEX idx_c2;" 
    args:"ALTER TABLE `shard_db`.`shard_table` DROP COLUMN `c2`" 
    sqlPattern:"~(?i)ALTER\\s+TABLE\\s+`shard_db`.`shard_table`\\s+DROP\\s+COLUMN\\s+`c2`" 
    sharding:true
    ```
7. Use `query-status` to guarantee that the `stage` of the task has been sustained as `Running`, and there is no more DDL statement that is blocking the replication (`blockingDDLs`) and no more sharding group to be resolved (`unresolvedGroups`).

> 8. Use `query-error` to guarantee that the DDL execution error has been removed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
8. Use `query-error` to guarantee that no DDL execution error exists.
```

    - The format of the binlog filename in DM is not completely consistent with that in the upstream MySQL.
    - When the replication error occurs, the position can be directly obtained from `failedBinlogPosition` returned by `query-error`.

2. DDL pattern: the regular expression (only for the DDL statement) matching mode

    - The DDL pattern is given by `--sql-pattern` in the command, for example, to match ``` ALTER TABLE `db2`.`tbl2` DROP COLUMN `c2` ```, the corresponding regular expression should be ``` ~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db2`.`tbl2`\s+DROP\s+COLUMN\s+`c2` ```.
    - The regular expression must be prefixed with `~` and cannot contain any common space (you can replace the space with `\s` or `\s+` in the string).

In the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables, if you need DM to automatically select a DDL lock owner to execute the skip or replace operation, then you must use the DDL pattern matching mode because the binlog positions corresponding to the DDL statements on different DM-workers have no logical connection and are hard to confirm.

> **Notes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Notes:**
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>
```

> - You can only register one operator (specified by `--binlog-pos`) for one binlog event. The previous one can be overwritten by the newly registered operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - You can only register one operator (specified by `--binlog-pos`) for one binlog event. The previous one can be overwritten by the newly registered operator.
```

> - Do not specify an operator for one binlog event by using `--binlog-pos` and `--sql-pattern` at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Do not specify an operator for one binlog event by using `--binlog-pos` and `--sql-pattern` at the same time.
```

> - The operator is deleted once it successfully matches the binlog event (not after the execution succeeds). If you need to match again (using `--sql-pattern`) later, you have to register a new operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - The operator is deleted once it successfully matches the binlog event (not after the execution succeeds). If you need to match again (using `--sql-pattern`) later, you have to register a new operator.
```

                        ]
                    }
                }
            ],
            "RelayError": {                      # The error information of the relay processing unit in this DM-worker.
                "msg": ""                        # The error information description.
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

#### sql-skip

`sql-skip` allows you to preset a skip operation that is to be executed when the position or the SQL statement of the binlog event matches with the specified `binlog-pos` or `sql-pattern`. 

##### Command usage

```bash
sql-skip <--worker=127.0.0.1:8262> [--binlog-pos=mysql-bin|000001.000003:3270] [--sql-pattern=~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db1`.`tbl1`\s+ADD\s+COLUMN\s+col1\s+INT] [--sharding] <task-name>
```

##### Arguments description

+ `worker`:
    - Flag parameter, string, `--worker`
    - If `--sharding` is not specified, `worker` is required; if `--sharding` is specified, `worker` is forbidden to use.
    - `worker` specifies the DM-worker in which the presetted operation is going to be executed.

+ `binlog-pos`: 
    - Flag parameter, string, `--binlog-pos`
    - You must specify `binlog-pos` or `--sql-pattern`, and you must not specify both.

>     - If it is specified, the skip operation will be executed when `binlog-pos` matches with the position of the binlog event. The format is `binlog-filename:binlog-pos`, for example, `mysql-bin|000001.000003:3270`.

Reviewer: Please limit the use of the word "will" and update similar expressions in this PR to present tense. Thanks!

Author: Okay :+1:

Author: Comment addressed. PTAL again. @lilin90

    - The regular expression must be prefixed with `~` and cannot contain any common space (you can replace the space with `\s` or `\s+` in the string).

In the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables, if you need DM to automatically select a DDL lock owner to execute the skip or replace operation, then you must use the DDL pattern matching mode because the binlog positions corresponding to the DDL statements on different DM-workers have no logical connection and are hard to confirm.

> **Notes:**
> - You can only register one operator (specified by `--binlog-pos`) for one binlog event. The previous one can be overwritten by the newly registered operator.
> - Do not specify an operator for one binlog event by using `--binlog-pos` and `--sql-pattern` at the same time.
> - The operator is deleted once it successfully matches the binlog event (not after the execution succeeds). If you need to match again (using `--sql-pattern`) later, you have to register a new operator.

> ### Support scenarios

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Supported scenarios
```

Reviewer: "Supported scenarios" is more appropriate here?

#### sql-replace

`sql-replace` allows you to preset a replace operation that is to be executed when the position or the SQL statement of the binlog event matches with the specified `binlog-pos` or `sql-pattern`.

##### Command usage

```bash
sql-replace <--worker=127.0.0.1:8262> [--binlog-pos=mysql-bin|000001.000003:3270] [--sql-pattern=~(?i)ALTER\s+TABLE\s+`db1`.`tbl1`\s+ADD\s+COLUMN\s+col1\s+INT] [--sharding] <task-name> <SQL-1;SQL-2>
```

##### Arguments description

+ `worker`: 
    - same with `--worker` of `sql-skip`

+ `binlog-pos`: 
    - same with `--binlog-pos` of `sql-skip`

+ `sql-pattern`: 
    - same with `--sql-pattern` of `sql-skip`

+ `sharding`: 
    - same with `--sharding` of `sql-skip`

+ `task-name`: 
    - same with `task-name` of `sql-skip`

+ `SQLs`: 
    - Non-flag parameter, string, required 
    - `SQLs` specifies the new SQL statements that are going to replace the original binlog event. You should separate multiple SQL statements with `;`, for example, ``` ALTER TABLE shard_db.shard_table drop index idx_c2;ALTER TABLE shard_db.shard_table DROP COLUMN c2; ```. 

### Usage examples

#### Passively skip after the replication gets interrupted

> ##### Business scenario

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Application scenario
```

Reviewer: Please also update the other 3 "Business" in this PR.

> Assume that we need to replicate the upstream table `db1.tbl1` to the downstream TiDB (not in the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables). The initial table schema is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assume that you need to replicate the upstream table `db1.tbl1` to the downstream TiDB (not in the scenario of merging and replicating data from sharded tables). The initial table schema is:
```

Reviewer: Generally, use "you" instead of "we" in the documentation. Please check and update similar expressions in this PR. Thanks!

Author: Comment addressed. PTAL again. @lilin90
